---
layout: post
title: Virtual Machines, What are they and how can they help?
date: 2016-01-22T12:30:20.000Z
categories: 491 Development
---
# Introduction
In the world of development, having your software be portable is a critical
idea. You want everyone in the world to be able to use your software, not just
users running Windows or users running Linux. For a long time I had heard the
term virtual machine (or VM), but I never understood the point of them entirely.
This post will look at the usefulness of virtual machines and a beginning look
at installing and creating VM's using [Oracle's VM VirtualBox][virtualbox].

# What are virtual machines?
In essence, a virtual machine is a computer inside your computer. A virtual
machine can emulate a different operating system than the one your computer
is currently running. In addition to emulating the software of the operating
system chosen, it can emulate hardware as well.

# Why virtual machines?
You may be thinking that virtual machines sound cool, but you do not necessarily
see how they could be useful on an everyday basis. One use for example, is that
in the portability example above, a virtual machine would be extremely useful
so that you can test your code on many different environments. This is much
easier than needing to have many different computers with different operating
systems or even one computer that can dual boot between them.

Another common use for a virtual machine is to enable practice setting up a
server without having to pay for one. Because a server you would rent from
someone like [Digital Ocean][digitalocean] or [AWS][aws] would be a base
operating system that you must set up yourself securely. A virtual machine is a
free way to practice this process so that when you are paying for a server, you
will not need to waste any time learning how to set it up.  

[virtualbox]: https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads
