---
layout: post
title: Conclusion to the Series
date: 2016-02-26T12:30:20.000Z
categories: 491 Development
---
Introduction
============
Over the course of the last five weeks we have taken a look at different
collaborative development tools that I hope will help you out when you are
starting a group project or if you you need to use them in a professional
environments. We covered three big topics: virtual machines, source control, and
some project management tools. I chose these topics because they were things
that I had to get acquainted with when I got my first development job. For this
post I thought I would just recap these ideas in one nice bookend of a post.

Virtual Machines
================
For the first two of my blog posts, I discussed the basics of virtual machines.
Virtual machines are literally another computer inside your computer. They give
you the advantage of being able to run a different a different operating system
than you currently are. This can be extremely useful for testing your code for
portability issues. I then went on to discuss the usefulness of Vagrant to use
in conjunction with a virtual machine. Especially helpful in group settings
Vagrant makes it possible to easily ensure that everyone on your team has their
virtual machine set up the same way, since you can run a script when the virtual
machine is created. In addition to this, the virtual machine has a folder that
is mirrored from your computer onto the virtual machine. This means you can edit
files using your favorite text editor or IDE and automatically have it update on
the VM.

Source Control
==============
The second topic I covered, and probably the most important, is source control.
Specifically I talked about git and the different git hosting sites. Git is an
important tool for yourself and for a team because it controls the changes you
have made. This can be useful in case someone accidentally deletes something or
a feature that is being worked on is being abandoned. Dealing with these
problems are not an issue when using source control. I find it to be an
invaluable tool to each and every developer, on every project that you will ever
work on. I then went on to look at three different hosting sites for git. These
sites each had pros and cons and your choice of hosting can depend a lot on the
group you are working with and the openness you want to have with people not on
your team.

Project Management
==================
Finally, we looked at the project management tools Trello and Slack. Trello is a
tool that is used as a sort of to do list that can be organized into lists. This
is helpful as all the tasks are shared among your group and everyone can track
their progress easily. Keeping track of goals on a list like this is the best
way to make sure your team is on the same page and that work is getting done. I
also touched on the messaging tool Slack. It is a really popular up and coming
application that is a casual way for your team to communicate about your
projects. It has many integrations with all the other tools I have talked about.
It will notify you every time someone does something on Trello or anyone commits
new code on Bitbucket. It is becoming a commonplace very quickly for its low
learning curve and powerful tools.

Conclusion
==========
Overall, I hoped you learned from these posts and feel like they were helpful
on your journey to learn new tools and be prepared for whatever is thrown at you
in the future. Most of these tools are most likely not going anywhere anytime
soon, so it is never early enough to start getting used to it.
